Hi there.
I'm Eric Albert.
Over there is Ronnie Misra.
We're members of Apple's
Core Technologies team.
And today we're going to talk to you
about extending your application to
run on the Intel-based Macintoshes
that we just announced yesterday.
So what this means is we're going to
take you through the entire process
of taking an application whose authors
actually hadn't even contemplated
the existence of such machines.
And we're going to make it build,
move it to GCC4, make it run,
take you through the debugging process,
through the testing process,
and then talk about all of the things
that we ran into along the way and a
few additional things that you might
run into when you try to move your
applications to our Intel-based systems.
So first of all,
the things that you may have to
do when moving any application,
or that you're going to have to
do when moving any application.
Step one, make it build.
In a lot of cases, actually,
this is the most challenging thing,
because the first step
here is move it to GCC 4.
And if you're building
with CodeWare today,
or if you're building with GCC 3.3,
then actually you can do this today
without even installing Xcode 2.1.
You can do it on the
shipping version of Tiger.
You can do it in Xcode 2.1
without building Universal.
But you have to move your
application to GCC 4.
And whether you do that with
an Xcode or with Makefiles,
whatever works for your
project as you build today.
Second,
you have to make your build environment
work on our Intel-based systems.
So if you're using Xcode,
that's really simple.
It works.
Just install Xcode 2.1.
Everything's there.
If you are not using Xcode, however,
if you're using configure
scripts or Makefiles,
or if you have custom build tools to pre-
or post-process files or to construct
parts of your build environment,
then you're going to have to make those
work before you can actually get to the
point of making your application work.
In some cases,
you may be able to run some
build tools translated.
But in a lot of cases,
you're just going to have to rebuild
them for Intel-based systems or
rebuild them as Universal binaries.
And then go from there.
And once that's done,
to actually get your application
to build on Intel-based systems
or with the 10.4 Universal SDK,
we have a few small API changes.
And when I say small here, I really,
honestly, truly mean small.
Just a couple targeted things
that affect a few people that you
may have to adopt to allow your
applications to work on these systems.
Once all of that's done and you
have an application that builds,
then you can start
building your application.
And then you can start
And that's great.
You can then go ahead and run it.
And chances are reasonably
good that it'll just launch.
And then you see what breaks.
Unfortunately,
there isn't any sort of magic pixie dust
that you can drop on your application to
find all of the endiness problems that
you might run into or anything like that.
Instead, really, you run through it.
You do a full QA pass.
You test all of the features.
And you see what works and what doesn't,
what draws correctly and what doesn't.
Ideally, all of it will be just fine.
But, you know,
chances are there might be.
There's a couple of things here and
there that you need to patch up.
And the way to do that is just
to run through everything.
So how hard is all of this?
Well.
It's not very hard at all.
You heard at the keynote, of course,
about Mathematica,
and that was two hours.
That was exceptional.
I know I've talked to a lot of
people who have actually moved their
applications over to our Intel-based
systems already and have said,
wow, how on earth did it take the
Mathematica people so long?
Mine came up in 15 minutes.
Well, for some people, that may be true.
For others,
it may take a little bit longer.
So I'm not going to stand up
here and say this is incredibly
easy or anything like that.
For some people, it may be simple.
For others,
it may be a larger amount of work.
It really depends on your code base,
depends on what your
application is doing.
But in general, it just isn't that hard.
Like Steve said,
this is not the Mac OS 9 to
Mac OS X transition all over again.
It should be a lot easier than that.
So, what we're actually going to do...
...is show you today is Firefox.
We're going to move Firefox to
our Intel-based systems.
So if you aren't familiar with Firefox,
it's probably the world's
second most popular web browser.
It comes from the Mozilla Foundation.
The reason why we could work on it
is because it's entirely open source.
So you can actually go
and grab the source code.
In fact, after this,
you can go and grab the source code and
make the changes that we talk about here.
And then you'll actually be able
to bring it up on our systems.
So Firefox consists of
four million lines of code.
The authors, of course,
never had to think about these systems.
So there isn't really anything
in there that would contemplate
being run on Mac OS X on Intel.
And with that much code,
you'd think that there
are a lot of problems.
But in fact,
we're actually going to take you through
it over the course of this session.
So, step one.
When you go to the Mozilla website
and you grab the Firefox source code,
...so, step one.
When you go to the Mozilla website
and you grab the Firefox source code,
...then the first thing that you
have to do is actually download and
install something called "Think"
...and then install a bunch of open
source libraries that come from Think.
If you aren't familiar with Think,
it's a package management system
...that lets you install a
variety of open source packages,
applications, libraries,
and other things like that on Mac OS X.
It isn't the only package
management system.
There are others which are
either easier or harder,
depending on a variety of things,
...to make run on our
Intel-based systems.
But since Think is the
one that Firefox uses,
then that's the one that
we're going to show you.
And when you download the Think code
and you start the install,
then, well, you get this right away.
Checking system i386 Apple Darwin 8.1.0,
Think is currently not
supported on x86 Darwin.
Darn it.
Various parts of Think hardcode
PowerPC and assume to run on a
PowerPC-based operating system.
Use Think on this
system at your own risk.
That just isn't to please me.
That just isn't too promising.
We don't really like the sound of that.
So,
step one is to make this stop happening.
When you get error messages like this,
and Ronnie will cover some similar
cases in the Firefox code later,
...the easiest thing to do,
or the best thing to
do when you start out,
is search through the source code,
...figure out where this
error message is coming from,
find the case that's
actually triggering it,
...fix that case, and then move on.
Hopefully things will run a lot better.
In this case,
we search for the error message,
find it in a Perl module
file inside the Think code.
Think actually largely
consists of Perl code.
And we see here there's this case where
they check the host name of the system.
And they say, "Okay,
if we're running on any random version
of this Darwin x86 thing that Apple has
provided for a number of years,
...which not all that many
people have actually used,
then we're going to say, 'Okay,
it isn't supported,' and slightly worse,
...as far as we're concerned,
we're going to default to trying
to act like we're on Jaguar." But,
well, this isn't Jaguar anymore.
This is Mac OS X on Intel-based
Macintoshes running Tiger.
So we have to add a new case for this.
And it says, "Okay,
if our platform is actually Darwin 8.1.0,
then copy what Think currently
has for Tiger," ...which says
this brand new system is still
being tested but should work.
And hopefully it'll work once we're done.
And then use the current
Think Tiger distribution.
So when we add that,
we get past that first
stage and we move on.
And Think starts compiling.
We get past the configure script.
And it's building and
we get a compiler error.
And this error,
"Array type has incomplete
element type," Well,
this is not Intel-specific.
In fact, this is just something
that needs a fix for GCC4.
Today doesn't entirely know about GCC4.
GCC4 is the compiler for
Intel-based Macintoshes.
So we're going to have to fix this.
And when we fix that and move on,
that's it.
We're done.
So an entire package
management system for Mac OS X.
Two changes.
One to the configure script.
One to one of the files.
And at this point, actually,
we have -- we can install the
four libraries that Firefox needs.
We can build them for Intel.
And then we can move
on to Firefox itself.
And now then over to Ronnie.
All right.
So I wish I could say that it
was as easy to port Firefox,
just two changes, but unfortunately,
that's not the case.
Let's see what actually happens
when we start to compile it.
We're going to need to switch
to the computers to see this.
So, I guess I should have given this
introduction while we were all waiting.
I'm not actually going to compile
most of the code right here,
right now,
because that would take forever.
Instead, I have sort of canned
output from Make Files,
and I already have diffs
ready for us to see.
So I just wanted to point that out right
now so that you guys don't think that I'm
trying to pull the wool over your eyes.
It does take a while to build Firefox.
I think it takes about half
an hour for a full build.
And I have to do this several
times over the presentation.
So with that, let's see what happens
when we just type make.
[Transcript missing]
So here's the file merge output for
my changes to the configure script.
As you can see,
the changes are pretty small.
I basically just copied the PowerPC case
and changed the architecture for i386.
So I'll turn it back
over to Eric who can...
[Transcript missing]
Okay, so here's that same bit of code.
Instead of accessing the fields directly,
I'm using these APIs called
getAliasSizeFromPointer to access
the size of an alias record.
Unfortunately,
these APIs are relatively new.
They don't exist on Panther.
So if you want your code to continue
to compile and run on Panther,
you'll want to make a
macro to do the same thing.
Here I've done that using
the availability macros.
I define a macro called
getAliasSizeFromPointer,
which does the same thing
that this code used to do.
So this allows you to continue
to compile on earlier OSs.
[Transcript missing]
Firefox builds this internal
tool called ASDecode,
which is used to decode
Apple single files.
It throws an assertion.
So let's figure out
what's going on there.
Here's the bit of code
that throws the assertion.
You can see that it's not finding
the magic number that it expects.
If we look slightly earlier in the code,
you can see here's a structure.
It has multi-byte types.
These types in Apple single files
are defined to be Big-Endian.
So when running ASDecode
on this platform,
it sees the little-Endian version -- or,
sorry, it sees a swapped
version of those fields.
So --
In the next phase,
we'll make the changes required for
proper Endian access to these fields.
You'll see that I'm using
the OS swap routines.
OS swap big to host int32 takes in an
integer that's known to be big Endian
and converts it to the host Endianness,
whether that be little or big.
So the interesting thing to note here is
it does absolutely nothing on PowerPC,
so there's no performance impact to
using this in your existing PowerPC code.
So I don't have header guards
around this to say if big Endian.
So I had to use these macros
a couple places in the code.
Here's using the 16-bit version
instead of the 32-bit version.
The prototypes come from this header,
which you'll want to include.
We also--well,
Eric will talk more about this.
Amen.
So what he was showing
here is swap as needed.
And when you have to swap data,
there are actually four different
headers in the system that
define various swapping APIs.
So there's nsbyteorder.h in Foundation.
There's endian.h, which is in CarbonCore,
cfbyteorder.h in Core Foundation,
and osbyteorder.h,
which is in user include libkern.
Essentially,
they all end up calling the same thing.
You can call whichever one
you're the most comfortable with.
So if you're writing Objective-C code,
for example,
then you may want to use nsbydoordor.h
just because that's part of foundation.
If you're writing Carbon code,
then you can use ndn.h.
The important thing here is use
the functions and macros that we
provide for swapping because when
we sit down and take a look at
performance on the system and work on
improving it in a variety of places,
these are the things that we optimize.
If you write your own swapping code,
then it may turn out to be slower.
And particularly in those rare cases,
or hopefully rare cases,
where you have to swap a lot,
then you really want
to be using our APIs.
The second thing here, again,
is we recommend that you
don't add #if statements for
big-endian or little-endian when
you write your swapping code.
Because all of these,
if you are swapping from a
target architecture that's the
same as your host architecture,
will do absolutely nothing.
The compiler will simply
optimize that out.
It'll vanish from your code.
And then you'll have much
cleaner code than you would if
you actually said if big-endian,
then swap else little-endian do
nothing or something like that.
So now that we have
our swapping straight,
then on to Ronnie for the next step.
Okay.
So after making this change,
we get past the ASD code problem.
And we encounter this error.
The build system is mostly makefiles,
but they build some of
their targets with Xcode.
And makefiles driving Xcode and scripts
driving Xcode will not be the same.
So the scripts driving
Xcode will probably have to
be adapted for Xcode 2.1.
Xcode 2.1 has support for build
configurations that require a
change to where build targets
actually land in the build directory.
So let's take a look at what
those changes look like.
Now again, Firefox is an open source app,
and they want people to compile
it on all sorts of OSes.
So I wanted to make these changes work,
continue to work on older versions of
the OS and older versions of Xcode.
So you'll see here I've introduced
a new variable called builder,
which is by default dot,
and if I detect that the Xcode version
is greater than or equal to 620,
which is the build number
that Xcode reports,
then I use the appropriate
directory for the build style.
And here I've made the changes that
actually reference that variable.
And after that, we actually get a binary.
And here I'm running that binary in GDB,
just sort of expecting
that it's going to crash.
[Transcript missing]
RegParm isn't supported
on our platform right now.
If you do intro library calls,
some of the registers get corrupted.
And so for now,
I'm just going to turn that off.
So here are the diffs to turn it off.
Basically,
I've just added a section to the end
of their--or added a check to the end
of their pound diffs to make sure that
we're not on Mac OS when using regparm.
And after that,
we compile again and we run again.
You'll see I'm running it in GDB again.
That takes a little while to
launch because it runs-- or
it uses a lot of libraries.
And look at that.
Back there,
there's actually a Firefox window.
So we've brought it up with
relatively few changes,
but of course,
I wouldn't ship it at this point because
we haven't really done any testing.
The first thing we're going to
try to do is access some plug-ins.
I've got this bookmarked already.
[Transcript missing]
EBP minus 56 is this value.
And one thing that I should
mention about the ROS is our
stacks are 16-byte aligned.
The OS actually requires that
because we use these instructions
in various bits of code in ROS,
and so code that manipulates the
stack has to be aware of this.
Firefox is not aware.
If we look in the back trace -- oops,
wrong window.
There's this JavaScript invoke stuff
which calls into their XPC layer,
which we will see here,
manipulates the stack.
XPTC invoke by index sets up
a custom stack before calling
out to JavaScript code.
And we're going to have to change that
to be where to keep the stack aligned.
So those changes are here.
I've added support for saving the
stack away and making sure that it's 16
byte aligned and restoring the stack.
Again,
this probably won't affect most of you,
but I just wanted to point it out here
for those of you that it does affect.
But the more general
problem of optimizing code,
you may have a lot of code that you've
optimized for other Intel-based operating
systems or even for Mac OS X on PowerPC.
You'll want to reexamine some
of those optimizations because
some of your assumptions may
not be true on this platform,
and Eric will talk more about that.
So we went through actually two
significantly different steps here.
The first one is adopting
build configurations.
And hopefully we can get
the slides back up here.
I can talk about them anyway.
So as Ronnie mentioned,
the new build configurations
feature of Xcode 2.1,
which actually satisfies a need
that a lot of people have been
asking for for a long time,
which is to keep different copies for
debug and release builds of your binary
around so when you change that setting,
then you don't have to rebuild
everything from scratch.
It's absolutely terrific,
but it can be a little bit tricky
at times if you have projects
that use Makefiles that need to
reference things out of the build,
or if you have shell scripts
that need to reference things
that have already been built.
So if you have either of those and they
interact with your Xcode build results,
then you may have to make some
slight changes to them to actually
adopt build configurations.
And next, after that,
adhere to the Mac OS X ABI.
So there's some documentation about the
ABI in the universal binary programming
guidelines that you've now all received.
The two things that we
covered here-- first,
don't use the regparm attribute today.
It doesn't work on our current systems,
and that's something that certainly
we'll take a look at in the future.
And secondly,
maintain 16-byte stack alignment.
So if you do any custom
stack manipulation,
if you're doing custom code to call
between languages or anything like that,
then you may have code,
like what Ronnie showed with Firefox,
that ends up manipulating the stack.
And essentially,
the stack always has to be
16-byte aligned at the point
of the call instruction.
Otherwise, because the compiler actually,
for us,
generates vector instructions by default,
then subsequent code may crash because
it's assuming that the stack is aligned,
and therefore that it can use the aligned
versions of the vector instructions.
Now, back to Ronnie for the next step.
Okay, so I'm launching the
executable again in GDB.
So the next thing I want to
look at is plug-in support.
It seems like plugins sort of just work.
And as you can see,
it found the QuickTime plugin.
It found its default plugin.
But if we look down at
the bottom of the list,
it also found the Shockwave plugin.
Shockwave is only built
for PowerPC currently,
so we want to change the code in
Firefox to detect that it's not a
legal plugin for this architecture.
So let's take a look at that code.
So here's the code in Firefox to detect
whether something is a plugin file.
It already has some checks to make sure
that it has the right creator type and
: Thank you, Eric.
I'm going to start off by saying thank
you to all of you for joining us today.
So I've included some new headers,
and I've added this new function
called isPluginLoadable,
which takes a--
[Transcript missing]
we cause the code that supports
CFM plug-ins to not be turned on for
the native build on Intel because
we don't support CFM on native
processes running plug-ins.
CFM apps will continue to run under
the translator and CFM plug-ins
will work there but not here.
And here I've added in a check to
my new function to make sure that we
check the architecture before adding
any plug-in to our plug-in list.
So with that,
I'll hand it back over to Eric.
ERIC ALTER: OK.
So again,
what he showed you here was load
the right plugins for the system.
So an application can only load
plugins of the same architecture
as the application itself,
which means that if your
application is running translated,
then it can load PowerPC plugins.
If your application is running natively,
then it can load Intel plugins.
And if you try to actually call
NSBundleLoad or CFBundleLoad executable
on a bundle of the wrong architecture,
one that you can't load, then, well,
it'll simply fail to load,
and you'll probably get an
error message in the console.
And just your application's
behavior won't be quite as
nice as it would otherwise be.
So the best thing to do then is
to actually check the type of the
plugin that you're trying to load.
And don't try to load
CFM plugins in your Intel build.
And don't try to load Maco PowerPC thin
plugins when running natively.
So unfortunately, as he showed you,
the code for that is
currently a little bit messy.
You have to poke at the Mac OS headers.
Hopefully,
we'll have a better solution for you
in the future where you can actually
determine what architectures are
contained within an executable file.
And now that we have the
right plugins loading,
then off to the next step.
Okay.
Well, so here I'm running the app,
and you see the plugins actually work.
Here's a QuickTime trailer that
I cached from our trailer site.
[Transcript missing]
We can go to some of the news sites.
You can see that people were
talking about Apple's big
move when I cached this page.
But when we browse to some of
the other sites on Google News,
we get a crash.
So this is a crash in font handling code.
If we look at the code,
It's parsing font data.
One of the things that we mention
in our guide is that font data is
always big endian on this platform.
So when you have code that
directly references fields
for low-level parts of a font,
you'll want to adapt those to
properly deal with endianness.
We'll take a look at
the changes to do that.
So here I'm making use of
the OS swap macros again.
With these changes,
we're pretty much done.
I'm going to run the binary again.
Of course, when I say done,
we haven't really done
any extensive testing.
And after we go to more websites,
we'll probably find more problems.
But all in all, it was a relatively easy
process to port this app.
And it's generally pretty stable now.
Here we can go to that Google News page,
which crashed before.
And just to be more thorough,
I found this font test page on the web.
[Transcript missing]
So this last step here,
read and write data in
the right Endianness.
So some data is always Big Endian.
I was trying to think of any cases
in the system where we have data
that's always Little Endian today,
but I don't believe we do.
At least I'm pretty certain
that we haven't--if we do,
we haven't introduced any
new ones with this release.
So the data that's always Big Endian,
all of this is mentioned in the
Universal Binary Programming Guide.
So low-level font data,
and by that I mean if you're actually
poking at the font fields directly rather
than using the higher-level ATS APIs.
ColorSync profile element
data is always Big Endian.
Very low-level finder information,
and by that I mean if you're
calling get-attr-list,
not if you're calling fscatalog-info
or anything above that.
And as I mentioned before,
QuickDraw picture bounds,
which you may notice if you
haven't actually updated your code
to call QD get-picture bounds.
So that's it.
At that point, we have a web browser.
We have a major Mac OS X application that
we have been extended to run on Intel.
So to run once more through the steps
that you should follow to bring your
application over to our platform,
first, again, move it to GCC 4.
[Transcript missing]
Really?
Just run through everything?
See what you've got?
I mean,
like the example that Ronnie showed,
you hand it out to people
and they will find bugs,
and then you'll fix them.
And in general,
the fixes just aren't all that hard.
It's, "Oh, okay,
so we crash here because this
needs to be bytes swapped.
Great.
Here's a bytes swap.
Wonderful.
You're pretty confident
that it works." I mean,
one of the wonderful things
that we've found in making
changes for this platform is that
[Transcript missing]
So a few other common issues that
I wanted to touch on that we actually
didn't hit in the process of moving
Firefox to our Intel-based systems.
First of all,
file formatting compatibilities.
So if you don't use
NS Coding or Cocos Archiving,
if you don't use a
text-based file format,
if you don't already have cross-platform
code to read and write files,
then you may have to do some work
to ensure that you always write your
file formats in exactly the same
way when running on PowerPC-based
systems or on Intel-based systems.
Because, you know,
it would be really nice if
your users could actually copy
those files between the two.
Second, networking issues.
One thing that we've seen all the
time is that people assume that,
or have been able to assume for years,
that, hey, PowerPC byte order is the
same as networking byte order,
so I don't actually need to
do any sort of byte swapping
when dealing with the network.
That's no longer the case,
or still the case.
PowerPC byte order is the same.
But on Intel-based systems,
the byte ordering is different
from network byte order,
so you may have to add
some swapping code there.
Integer divide by zero.
Because Firefox is
already cross-platform,
then presumably they've already
taken care of all of these cases.
But integer divide by zero is
fatal on all Intel systems.
And so in those cases,
you just have to check for
zero and return zero I'm sorry.
Some color drawing problems.
So we were rather fortunate that
we didn't see any with Firefox.
But OpenGL, Core Graphics, and Quickdraw,
all of those APIs,
if you have color drawing problems,
you may need some changes.
All of this is covered, again,
in our documentation.
But in a lot of cases,
drawing code will simply
work out of the box.
If it doesn't,
there are a few small things
that you may need to tweak.
Undefined or implementation-defined code.
So things that the compiler doesn't
necessarily warn you about doing.
Things that are undefined
with numeric calculations.
Things that are out of range
can return different results
than they used to on PowerPC.
And in those cases, well, hey,
it's a great way to track down these
bugs that may have been in your
application for a long time where
you were getting unexpected values.
Custom resources, Apple events,
or pasteboard types.
I'm not sure if anyone so far has
actually talked about the Core NDE and
APIs for flipping resources,
Apple events, or pasteboard data.
All of that's covered pretty thoroughly
in the universal binary guide.
But if you have custom resource types,
not ones that are standard in the system,
or if you have custom
Apple event or pasteboard types,
then you may need to write some
additional code to deal with
those either between processes
or when reading them off of disk.
And finally, we hit this all the time,
remember to test the
result on both architects.
We are providing,
or we will be providing,
either both systems for a long time.
And so you actually have to
run your app in both cases.
It's quite possible that when you make
a change to run better on Intel-based
systems that you inadvertently say,
swap all the time.
And then you move back
to PowerPC and realize,
well, actually swapping all the time
was wrong because the data
was right in the first place.
And so now you get your $4 billion
value on a PowerPC-based system instead.
So.
So that's the first thing.
The second thing is that you
can actually do some more work.
So you can do some more work on your own.
You can do some more work on your own.
And then you can do some
more work on your own.
So that's the first thing.
So more information throughout
the rest of the week.
We have documentation.
This says sample code.
I'm not sure how much, if any,
sample code we have specifically
dealing with this transition online yet.
But I presume we'll have some soon.
We have other resources at that page.
We have a few other related sessions
that I really do want to call out,
because these are really important if
you're thinking-- as you're working
on transitioning to this platform.
So first, moving to GCC 4.
If you aren't currently
building with GCC 4,
there's a session tomorrow at 5:00
that will be incredibly helpful.
I strongly suggest going.
It's a wonderful compiler,
but there are some changes that you
may have to make as you move to it.
Code with Apple's Image and
Signal Processing APIs for
Maximum Performance.
I don't know how they got that
many letters in their title.
But this is a session on Friday that's
going to talk about all kinds
of performance-related issues,
but one of them is migrating
AltaVec code to SSE,
SSE2, and SSE3.
And if you have AltaVec
code in your products today,
then that'll be very, very helpful.
Swimming with Shark.
Shark runs great for us on
our Intel-based systems.
If you go to the session,
then hopefully you'll get to
see what it's like on there.
And finally, our Universal Binary Lab,
which is downstairs on the first floor,
which is going to be open all week.
I believe it's open
until midnight tonight.
This is a great opportunity
for you to bring your code by,
and a lot of us are there helping
people move their applications.
And it's been just wonderful so far to
see all kinds of people come by and say,
Hey, you know, in 15 minutes... or half
an hour or an hour or so,
then I was able to get
everything running.
So hopefully you'll get
a chance to do the same.